Through the production of reading, the work reflects how passive reading becomes an active form of rewriting. In the interface industry, reading (and consuming, more generally) becomes a production, but in The Readers Project the human reader also experiences how the text becomes controlled, and how this challenges his/her reading. The Readers Project lets us read how our reading becomes productive as re-writing and how this production becomes part of the text and textual business of big software companies such as Google. The reader is able to see, explore and read the bureaucratisation and instrumentalisation of reading.

The instrumentalisation of reading also offers new ways of writing. For instance, Erica Scourti explores how users may express themselves re-writing the interface. With a feminist perspective, she focuses on the body and the ways it becomes profiled, programmed and gendered through for example Google and smartphones. In her video work Body Scan she uses the app CamFind to photograph parts of her body with an iPhone and search for similar images on the World Wide Web. The video work displays the photographed images and the images returned from the search. In the background Scourti reads from the search results: 

“Identifying human stomach. A hollow muscular organ. Forms gastric acid. Is it cancer? And, how to survive another human.” 

Scourti’s body appears overly intimate (exposed and photographed naked at close range); and yet, at the same time her voice is overly distanced to the object. In this way she demonstrates how the body is read, profiled and interpreted as a data and a commercial entity – or, more generally, how the interface has become part of the user's body; how the body is part of a larger sensorium that is at once human and nonhuman, representational and computational.

The video displays a strange mixture of her body, the way she is read and profiled, and all the cultural prejudices and commercial models she is subjected to. It thereby demonstrates, how prejudices, gender stereotypes and commercial biases are projected back to her (and everybody) even through intimate, bodily interaction. However, it does no longer seem to matter whether Google manages to profile the body successfully. In this way, Scourti exemplifies a body that not only comes into existence by subjecting itself to a consumer logic that objectifies it, but also a body that comes into existence by allowing itself to be read as a signal and be part of an interface industry’s textual machinery. To come into existence, the user does not need and desire to become a particular consumerist body (female, male, etc.), but to be read as a body. The body of the interface industry is therefore significantly different from the mass media body (that is stereotypical and inflicted with sameness). The neo-liberal body of Google is less dependent on replying to the image of a consuming body; instead, its subjectivity is greatly dependent on the body’s readability: that it can be measured, calculated and assessed in a million different ways. 


Cayley, John, and Daniel C. Howe. "The Readers Project."  http://thereadersproject.org/. ( Proximus NV → Level 3 Communications, Inc. → OSHEAN, Inc. → Rhode Island Network for Educ. Technology )  
Howe, Daniel C., and John Cayley. "The Readers Project: Procedural Agents and Literary Vectors." Leonardo 44, no. 4 (2011): 317-24.  
Portela, Manuel. Scripting Reading Motions : The Codex and the Computer as Self-Reflexive Machines.  Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2013.  
Scourti, Erica, Body Scan, https://vimeo.com/111503640, ( Proximus NV → RIPE Network Coordination Centre → Telia Company AB → Fastly ) 2014.  
Zuboff, Shoshana. "Big Other: Surveillance Capitalism and the Prospects of an Information Civilization." Journal of Information Technology no. 30 (2015): 75-89.