From the satellite, where the scale of the transformations of the Inner Colonization is visible, images of the agricultural plans show how a portion of a planet was brought materially to behave topologically, displaying how vast territories were turned into a productive regime thanks to the connection to huge water reservoirs. These are pictures that look in fact like a thermodynamic diagram, displaying the inner workings of an abstract machine. Coincidentally, during the first decades of the 20th century, and after the chemical industries had ended up synthetizing nitrogen to fuel the productivity of yields, a thermodynamic stance started to be applied to the Biosphere, the uppermost living layer of the planet. The works by the Russian mineralogist Vladimir Vernadsky or the American mathematician Alfred Lotka introduced the biochemistry of the soil itself as an additional agency, a “living film where the radiant energy of the Sun is transformed into free terrestrial, chemical energy” (Vernadsky).
  
This brings up Jussi Parikka's argument in his book A Geology of Media: it is not only that the earth as a resource has been registered through media for a long time; the registering tools themselves have been provided and enabled by the earth, in the form of essential chemicals, minerals and microorganisms mainly. The relation between abstract encodings and material portions of the earth is a two-way one; a closed loop, a "double-bind" (Parikka 2015), characterizes the interweaving between the planet and the technical mediations that allow to grasp it as a readable entity. A sphere of "medianatures" emerges, in his words, as the entangled set of practices where media and nature appear as "co-constituting spheres, where the ties are intensively connected in material nonhuman realities as much as in relations of power, economy, and work", making it impossible to distinguish such spheres separately. 

This dual development of aerially-aided soil operations has evolved to become a multi-scale practice today, in a much more dense and intensive way, in fact. Under the umbrella term of _Precision Farming_, devices on tractors are programmed to control the dispersion of water and chemicals based upon information gained from satellite or aircraft based sensors that measure the wavelengths of radiant energy absorbed and reflected from the land surface. Soil moisture, surface temperature, photosynthetic activity, and weed or pest infestations are addressable with a resolution of a square meter, almost exactly the size of the irrigation system actuator. 

Writing about the practices and methods used to depict with and about light phenomena, Sean Cubitt recalls an analogy posed by Descartes, where light rays are compared to the precision of the stick used by those born blind, that allows others to almost say "they see with their hands" (Cubitt 2014). In this case, a space of mechanical movements operated by agricultural machinery, clearing and levelling operations, irrigation, the application of precise rates of chemicals by turning on and off electro valves, all these techniques are the sticks and hands of this particular way of producing the visible.
