## Nicolas Malevé

The  process of training an algorithm binds together learning and alienation. The agencies of the human worker and the algorithmic agents are both reduced and impoverished. The human worker is insulated (from her co-workers and from the algorithm she is preparing the “intelligence”), her margin of interpretation is narrowly defined and the indecent wage forces her to a tiring rhythm of work (see vignette 1). The algorithm is trained as an animal in a lab, receiving signals to be interpreted unequivocally and rewarded or punished according to the established ground truth it cannot challenge (see vignette 2). If the teaching of machines implies a reflexion about liberating practices of pedagogy, where should we look for inspiration?  
  
Paulo Freire's The Pedagogy of the Oppressed proposes a few useful principles.   
For Freire,  it only makes sense to speak of pedagogy in the perspective of the liberation of the oppressed (Freire, 1969). Freire sees his pedagogical method as a way for the oppressed to learn how to change a world made by and for their oppressor. A first concept is what he calls the “banking” pedagogy. The oppressor imposes a world in which only the members of a certain class have access to knowledge[1]. The others merely have the right to assimilate passively a never ending recital: Lima is the capital of Peru, two and two make four, etc. Learners are empty entities where their masters make the “deposit” of fragments of knowledge. Their empty brain is filled with the oppressor's content. But the masters are not interested in the productive use they may make to improve their condition. What they have to learn is to repeat and reproduce. The knowledge “desposited” by the oppressor remains the oppressor's property. Freire's own pedagogy proposes the opposite. For him, the oppressed never comes “empty” of knowledge and the educational process has to make the learner realize he has already produced knowledge even if this knowledge doesn't count in the traditional pedagogical framework.  
This leads to a second point. The humanity of the subject engaged in a pedagogical relationship should not be taken for granted. The subject comes alienated and dehumanized. The category “human” becomes problematic and it is only through the process of learning that humanization takes place. The oppressed is made of the oppressor and has internalized his world view. What counts in the process of humanization is to get rid of the oppressor inhabiting the oppressed. Freire insists on the fact that a teaching that would fail in the process of helping the learner to free oneself from the oppressor's world view, and merely let him acquire more power through knowledge will fail to create a revolutionary subject. It will create better servants of the current oppressor or, worse, new and more efficient oppressors.
The third book's striking point is the affirmation that nobody is a liberator in isolation and that nobody liberates oneself alone. Liberation through pedagogy always happens when the learner and the “teacher” are mutually liberating each other. There is no idea a priori of what the liberation pedagogy should be. Both entities are learning the practices that will lead to freedom from the relationship itself.  
  
[1]: See Freire's insistence in addressing this question as a political problem rather than an ontological one in his discussion with Seymour Pappert: http://www.papert.org/articles/freire/freirePart2.html (Proximus NV → RIPE Network Coordination Centre → Telia Company AB → Amazon.com, Inc. → Amazon.com, Inc.)